CONSTITUTION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Passed by nation-wide voting of December 12, 1993, with the amendments approved by nation-wide voting on July 1, 2020

We, the multinational people of the Russian Federation,
united by a common fate in our land,
establishing human rights and freedoms, civil peace and accord,
preserving the historically established unity of the state,
proceeding from the universally recognised principles of equality and self-determination of peoples,
revering the memory of ancestors who have conveyed to us love and respect of the Fatherland, belief in good and justice,
reviving the sovereign statehood of Russia and asserting the firmness of its democratic basis,
striving to ensure the well-being and prosperity of Russia,
proceeding from the responsibility for our Fatherland before present and future generations,
recognising ourselves as part of the world community,
adopt the CONSTITUTION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION.

Section One

Chapter 1. The Fundamentals of the Constitutional System

Article 1

1. The Russian Federation - Russia is a democratic federal law-governed State with a republican form of government.
2. The names "Russian Federation" and "Russia" shall be equal.

Article 2

An individual, as well as rights and freedoms thereof, are the supreme value. The recognition, observance and protection of rights and freedoms of an individual and citizen shall be the State duty.

Article 3

1. The bearer of sovereignty and the only source of power in the Russian Federation shall be its multinational people.
2. The people shall exercise their power directly, and also through the bodies of state power and local self-government.
3. The supreme direct expression of the power of the people shall be referenda and free elections.
4. No one may usurp power in the Russian Federation. Seizure of power or usurping state authority shall be prosecuted by federal law.

Article 4

1. The sovereignty of the Russian Federation shall cover the whole of its territory.
2. The Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws shall have supremacy in the whole territory of the Russian Federation.
3. The Russian Federation shall ensure the integrity and inviolability of its territory.

Article 5

1. The Russian Federation consists of Republics, territories, regions, cities of federal importance, an autonomous region and autonomous areas - equal constituent entities of the Russian Federation.
2. A republic (State) shall have its own constitution and legislation. A territory, region, city of federal importance, autonomous region, and autonomous area shall have its charter and legislation.
3. The federal structure of the Russian Federation is based on its state integrity, the unity of the system of state authority, the division of authority and powers between the bodies of state power of the Russian Federation and bodies of state power of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation, the equality and self-determination of peoples in the Russian Federation.
4. In relations with federal bodies of state authority all the constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall be equal.

Article 6

1. Citizenship of the Russian Federation shall be acquired and terminated according to federal law; it shall be one and equal, irrespective of the grounds of acquisition.
2. Every citizen of the Russian Federation shall enjoy in its territory all the rights and freedoms and bear equal duties provided for by the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
3. A citizen of the Russian Federation may not be deprived of his or her citizenship or of the right to change it.

Article 7

1. The Russian Federation is a social State whose policy is aimed at creating conditions for a worthy life and the unhindered development of man.
2. In the Russian Federation the labour and health of people shall be protected, guaranteed minimum wages and salaries shall be established, state support ensured for the family, maternity, paternity and childhood, for disabled persons and the elderly, a system of social services developed, state pensions, allowances and other social security guarantees shall be established.

Article 8

1. In the Russian Federation guarantees shall be provided for the integrity of the economic space, a free flow of goods, services and financial resources, support for competition, and the freedom of economic activity.
2. In the Russian Federation recognition and equal protection shall be given to private, state, municipal and other forms of ownership.

Article 9

1. Land and other natural resources shall be utilised and protected in the Russian Federation as the basis of life and activity of the people living in the corresponding territories.
2. Land and other natural resources may be in private, state, municipal and other forms of ownership.

Article 10

State power in the Russian Federation shall be exercised on the basis of its division into legislative, executive and judicial. The legislative, executive and judicial authorities shall be independent.

Article 11

1. State power in the Russian Federation shall be exercised by the President of the Russian Federation, the Federal Assembly (the Council of the Federation and the State Duma), the Government of the Russian Federation, and the courts of the Russian Federation.
2. State power in the constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall be exercised by the bodies of state authority created by them.
3. The division of authority and powers among the bodies of state power of the Russian Federation and the bodies of state power of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall be effectuated by this Constitution, federal and other treaties on the delimitation of the authority and powers.

Article 12

In the Russian Federation local self-government shall be recognised and guaranteed. Local self-government shall be independent within the limits of its authority. The bodies of local self-government shall not be part of the system of state authorities.

Article 13

1. In the Russian Federation ideological diversity shall be recognised.
2. No state or obligatory ideology may be established as the only one.
3. In the Russian Federation political diversity and the multi-party system shall be recognised.
4. Public associations shall be equal before the law.
5. The creation and activities of public associations whose aims and actions are aimed at a forced change of the fundamental principles of the constitutional system and at violating the integrity of the Russian Federation, at undermining its security, at setting up armed units, and at instigating social, racial, national and religious strife shall be prohibited.

Article 14

1. The Russian Federation is a secular state. No state or obligatory religion may be established.
2. Religious associations shall be separate from the State and shall be equal before the law.

Article 15

1. The Constitution of the Russian Federation shall have the supreme juridical force, direct application and shall be used on the whole territory of the Russian Federation. Laws and other legal acts adopted in the Russian Federation shall not contradict the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
2. The bodies of state authority, bodies of local self-government, officials, private citizens and their associations shall be obliged to observe the Constitution of the Russian Federation and laws.
3. Laws shall be officially published. Unpublished laws shall not be used. Normative legal acts concerning human rights, freedoms and duties of man and citizen may not be used, if they are not officially published for general knowledge.
4. The universally-recognised norms of international law and international treaties and agreements of the Russian Federation shall be a component part of its legal system. If an international treaty or agreement of the Russian Federation establishes other rules than those envisaged by law, the rules of the international agreement shall be applied.

Article 16

1. The provisions of the present chapter of the Constitution comprise the fundamental principles of the constitutional system of the Russian Federation, and may not be changed otherwise than according to the rules provided for in this Constitution.
2. No other provision of the present Constitution may contradict the fundamental principles of the constitutional system of the Russian Federation.